.TH s/qmail: qmail-control 5
.SH "NAME"
qmail-control \- qmail configuration files
.SH "INTRODUCTION"
You can change the behavior of the
.B qmail
system by modifying
.BR s/qmail 's
.I control files
in
.BR HOME/control .

.B s/qmail
can survive with just one control file,
.IR me ,
containing the
fully-qualified name of the current host.
This file is used as the default for
other hostname-related control files.

Comments (\'# comment\') are allowed
in
.IR badmailfrom ,
.IR badmimetypes ,
.IR badloadertypes ,
.IR locals ,
.IR percenthack ,
.IR qmqpservers ,
.IR rcpthosts ,
.IR smtproutes ,
and
.IR virtualdomains .
Trailing spaces and tabs are allowed in any control.

The following table lists all control files
other than
.IR me .
See the corresponding man pages for further details.

.RS
.nf
.ta 5c 10c
control	default	used by

.I authsenders	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-remote
.I badhelo	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I badmailfrom	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I badmimetypes	\fR$BADMIMETYPE	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I badloadertypes	\fR$BADLOADERTYPE	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I badrcptto	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I bouncefrom	\fRMAILER-DAEMON	\fRqmail-send
.I bouncehost	\fIme	\fRqmail-send
.I bouncemaxbytes	\fI0	\fRqmail-send
.I concurrencylocal	\fR10	\fRqmail-send
.I concurrencyremote	\fR20	\fRqmail-send
.I domaincerts	\fR(none) 	\fRqmail-remote
.I domainips	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-remote
.I defaultdomain	\fIme	\fRqmail-inject
.I defaulthost	\fIme	\fRqmail-inject
.I databytes	\fR$DATABYTES	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I doublebouncehost	\fIme	\fRqmail-send
.I doublebounceto	\fRpostmaster	\fRqmail-send
.I envnoathost	\fIme	\fRqmail-send
.I helohost	\fIme	\fRqmail-remote
.I idhost	\fIme	\fRqmail-inject
.I localiphost	\fIme	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I locals	\fIme	\fRqmail-send
.I morercpthosts	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I mailfromrules	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I percenthack	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-send
.I plusdomain	\fIme	\fRqmail-inject
.I qmqpservers	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-qmqpc
.I qmtproutes	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-remote
.I queuelifetime	\fR604800	\fRqmail-send
.I rcpthosts	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I recipients	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd 
.I spfexplain  	\fRSPF_DEFEXP	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I spflocalrules	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I smtpgreeting	\fIme	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I smtproutes	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-remote
.I timeoutconnect	\fR60	\fRqmail-remote
.I timeoutremote	\fR1200	\fRqmail-remote
.I timeoutsmtpd	\fR1200	\fRqmail-smtpd
.I tlsdestinations	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-remote
.I virtualdomains	\fR(none)	\fRqmail-send
.fi

.RE
.IR Defaultvalues
following a $ sign (ie. $RELAYCLIENT) depend on the
corresponding environment variable.

.IR Use
.BR qmail-showctl
to display actual settings.
    
.SH "SEE ALSO"
qmail-inject(8),
qmail-qmqpc(8),
qmail-remote(8),
qmail-send(8),
qmail-showctl(8),
qmail-smtpd(8).
