.TH s/qmail: matchup 1
.SH NAME
matchup \- collect information on messages and deliveries
.SH SYNTAX
.B matchup
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B matchup
reads a series of lines from
.BR qmail-send ,
with a numeric timestamp in front of each line.
.B matchup
matches the end of each delivery attempt with the start of the delivery attempt
and with the relevant message information;
it replaces
.BR qmail-send 's
message reports and delivery reports
with message lines and delivery lines in the format described below.

.B matchup
exits after it sees end of file.
It prints pending messages and deliveries on descriptor 5,
in a format suitable for input to a future invocation of
.BR matchup :

.EX
   <log.1 matchup >out.1 5>pending.2
.br
   cat pending.2 log.2 | matchup >out.2 5>pending.3
.br
   cat pending.3 log.3 | matchup >out.3 5>pending.4
.EE

Note that the 5> notation does not work with csh.
.SH "MESSAGE LINES"
A message line summarizes the delivery results for a message
that has left the queue:

.EX
   m \fIbirth\fR \fIdone\fR \fIbytes\fR \fInk\fR \fInz\fR \fInd\fR <\fIsender\fR> \fIqp\fR \fIuid\fR
.EE

Here
.I birth
and
.I done
are timestamps,
.I bytes
is the number of bytes in the message,
.I nk
is the number of successful deliveries,
.I nz
is the number of deferred delivery attempts,
.I nd
is the number of failed delivery attempts,
.I sender
is the message's return path,
.I qp
is the message's long-term queue identifier,
and
.I uid
is the userid of the user that queued the message.

Note that
.B matchup
converts
.I sender
to lowercase.
This can lose information,
since a few hosts pay attention to the case in the box part of an address.
.SH "DELIVERY LINES"
A delivery line shows the result of a single delivery attempt:

.EX
   d \fIresult\fR \fIbirth\fR \fIdstart\fR \fIddone\fR \fIbytes\fR
.br
   <\fIsender\fR> \fIchan\fR.\fIrecip\fR \fIqp\fR \fIuid\fR \fIreason\fR
.EE

Here
.IR birth ,
.IR bytes ,
.IR sender ,
.IR qp ,
and
.I uid
are message information as above;
.I chan
is the channel for this delivery;
.I recip
is the recipient address for this delivery;
.I dstart
and
.I ddone
are timestamps;
.I result
is the letter k for success, z for deferral, d for failure;
and
.I reason
is a more detailed explanation of the delivery result.

.B matchup
converts
.I recip
to lowercase.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
xqp(1),
xrecipient(1),
xsender(1),
accustamp(1),
qmail-log(5),
splogger(8)
