.TH s/qmail: qmail-smtpd 8

.SH "NAME"
qmail-smtpd \- receive mail via SMTP

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B qmail-smtpd
[
.I checkprogram
.I subprogram
]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B qmail-smtpd
receives mail messages via the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
and invokes
.B qmail-queue
to deposit them into the outgoing queue.
.B qmail-smtpd
must be supplied with several environment variables;
see
.BR tcp-environ(5) .

.B qmail-smtpd
is responsible for counting hops.
It rejects any message with 100 or more 
.B Received
or
.B Delivered-To
header fields.

.B qmail-smtpd
supports ESMTP and offers 8BITMIME, DATA, PIPELINING, SIZE, AUTH, and STARTTLS options.
.B qmail-smtpd
includes a "Mail From:" parameter parser and obeys "Auth" and "Size" advertisements.
.B qmail-smtpd
STARTTLS implementation requires the use of 
.B sslserver
from ucspi-ssl.0.9x and the OpenSSL library.

Authentication mode is facilitated in case the environment variable 
SMTPAUTH is set which tells
.B qmail-smtpd
to accept LOGIN, PLAIN, and eventually CRAM-MD5 Auth types
and if additionally a PAM
.I checkprogram 
is available which reads on file descriptor 3 the username, a 0 byte, 
the password or CRAM-MD5 digest/response derived from the SMTP client, 
another 0 byte, a CRAM-MD5 challenge (if applicable to the Auth type),
and a final 0 byte.
.I checkprogram
invokes
.I subprogram
upon successful authentication, which should return 0 to
.BR qmail-smtpd ,
effectively setting the environment variables RELAYCLIENT and 
TCPREMOTEINFO or TCP6REMOTEINFO
(any supplied value replaced with the authenticated username).
.B qmail-smtpd
will reject the authentication attempt if it receives a nonzero return
value from
.I checkprogram
or
.IR subprogram .

STARTTLS support is enabled setting the environment variable UCSPITLS.
In this case, 
.B qmail-smtpd
communicates with the
.B sslserver
program interface through a control socket, a reading and a writing pipe, dynamically
defined during the session start to be used for transport layer encryption. 
.B qmail-smtpd
provides mutual authentication based on X.509 client certs and relaying 
with additional SMTP Return-Path validation.

.B qmail-smtpd
may employ additional DNS look-ups for the "Mail From:" envelope sender 
address and/or the HELO/EHLO greeting string from the MTA client.

.B qmail-smtpd 
implements a SPF record check for the domain part of the received
.I Mail-From: <return-path>
address or
the
.I HELO/EHLO
statement in case the domain information is missing.
This behavior is triggered by the environment variable
.BR SPF .

.SH "TRANSPARENCY"
.B qmail-smtpd
converts the SMTP newline convention into the UNIX newline convention
by converting CR LF into LF.
Usually, it returns a temporary error and drops the connection on bare LFs.

.B qmail-smtpd
accepts messages that contain long lines or non-ASCII characters,
even though such messages violate the SMTP protocol.

.SH "CONTROL FILES"
.TP 5 
.IR badhelo
Unacceptable HELO/EHLO greeting strings.
.B qmail-smtpd
will reject every connection attempt 
if the client MTA's HELO/EHLO greeting compares with 
a wildmat pattern provided in
.IR badhelo
in case the environment variable 
.B HELOCHECK
is set. 
.IR badhelo
checks have precedence over DNS lookups.
DNS lookups can be avoided, if the announced 
HELO/EHLO greeting string is concatinated 
with a trailing '!' and included in 
.IR badhelo : 

.EX
  localhost
  localhost.localdomain
  127.0.0.1
  mygreetingstring
  [192.168.1.2]!
.EE

.TP 5
.I badmailfrom
Unacceptable envelope sender addresses.
.B qmail-smtpd
will reject every recipient address for a message
if the envelope sender address is listed in
.IR badmailfrom .
A line in
.I badmailfrom
may be of the form
.BR @\fIhost ,
meaning every address at
.IR host .
Additionally, any envelope sender address can be filtered
with a wildmat check:

.EX
  *@earthlink.net
  !fred@earthlink.net
  [0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9]@[0-9][0-9][0-9].com
  answerme@save*
  *%*
  @yahoo.com-
  @hotmail.com=
  @mydomain.tld+
  ~yahoo.com
  ?nobody@example.com
.EE

A
.I badmailfrom
file with this contents reject all mail from Earthlink except from
fred@earthlink.net. It also rejects all mail with addresses like:
12345@123.com and answerme@savetrees.com. Further, any mail with
a sender address containing a percent sign (%) is rejected.

This implementation recognises 'extended' addresss in 
.I badmailfrom 
allowing to reject mails with particluar spoofed domain addresses:

(1) The address is appended with a '-'. 
Now, if
.I TCP(6)REMOTEHOST
equals 'unknown', mails with the corresponding address are rejected
(badmailfromunknown).

(2) The address is appended with a '='.
In case
.I TCP(6)REMEOTEHOST
is set mails, whose domain part of the envelope addresses 
.B not 
matching 
the corresponding entry are rejected (badmailfromwellknown).

(3) The address is appended with a '+'.
If 
.I RELAYCLIENT 
is not set and the sender address matches a corresponding entry 
(anti-spoofing for internal addresses).

(4) The address is enhanced with a leading '~'.
This requires a (left to right partial) matching of 
.I TCP(6)REMOTEHOST 
with the domain part of the envelope address.
Thus, this specific entry in 
.I badmailfrom 
uses 
.I TCP(6)REMOTEHOST
in the first place (badmailfrommismachteddomains).

(5) The address is enhanced with a leading '?'.
Emails with the corresponding sender address pass by all further
.I  badmailfrom
tests including the
.I MFDNSCHECK 
check.

Note: The 'enhanced' addresses are not subject of the wildmat check
and are evaluated in lower-case.

The wildmat check is done in the order: 
Least significant to most significant.
Example:

.EX
  *
  !
  !*@*.*
  *viagra*
.EE

.TP
.I badloadertypes.cdb
Unacceptable base64 loader types in the message.
.B qmail-smtpd
will reject every message if 5 significant
characters (eg.
.BR Mi5kb)
anyware in the base64 encoded attachment is identical 
to those compiled into
.IR badloadertypes.cdb .
Use
.B qmail-badloadertypes
to derive
.I badloadertypes.cdb
from
.IR badloadertypes .
In order to make the search efficient, all bad loader 
types have to start with the same character (eg. "M").
The control file
.I badloadertypes.cdb
is evaluated if the environment variable BADLOADERTYPE
is set to the first character according to the contents of
.IR badloadertypes .
.TP
.I badmimetypes.cdb
Unacceptable base64 encoded MIME types in message.
.B qmail-smtpd
will reject every message if the first 9 significant
characters (eg.
.BR TVqQAAMAA )
of any of it's embedded MIME types is identical with one
compiled into
.IR badmimetypes.cdb .
Use
.B qmail-badmimetypes
to derive
.I badmimetypes.cdb
from
.IR badmimetypes .
The control file
.I badmimetypes.cdb
is evaluated if the environment variable 
.I BADMIMETYPE
is set.
In addition, irregular BASE64 attachments carrying whitespaces can
be rejected defining
.IR BADMIMETYPE='!' .
.TP 5
.I badrcptto
Unacceptable envelope recipient addresses.
.B qmail-smtpd
will reject every incoming message
if the envelope recipient address is listed in
.IR badrcptto .
This control file is complementary to
.IR badmailfrom .
A line in
.I badrcptto
may be of the form
.BR @\fIhost ,
meaning every address at
.IR host .
.I badrcptto
employes the same filtering logic for the envelope recipient as
.IR badmailfrom .
Effectively,
.IR badrcptto
allows a "whitelisting" of envelope recipient addresses:

.EX
  *
  !user1@mydomain.com
  !user2@mydomain.com
  !*@anotherdomain.com
.EE
.TP 5
.I databytes
Maximum number of bytes allowed in a message,
or 0 for no limit.
Default: 0.
If a message exceeds this limit,
.B qmail-smtpd
returns a permanent error code to the client;
in contrast, if
the disk is full or
.B qmail-smtpd
hits a resource limit,
.B qmail-smtpd
returns a temporary error code.

.I databytes
counts bytes as stored on disk, not as transmitted through the network.
It does not count the
.B qmail-smtpd
Received line, the
.B qmail-queue
Received line, or the envelope.

If the environment variable DATABYTES
is set, it overrides
.IR databytes .
.TP 5
.I localiphost
Replacement host name for local IP addresses.
Default:
.IR me ,
if that is supplied.
.B qmail-smtpd
is responsible for recognizing native IPv4/IPv6 addresses for the
current host.
When it sees a recipient address of the form
.I box@[d.d.d.d]  
or
.IR box@[a:b:c:d:e:f:g:h] ,
where
.I d.d.d.d  
or
.IR a:b:c:d:e:f:g:h
is a local IPv4/IPv6 address,
it replaces
.I [d.d.d.d] 
or
.IR [a:b:c:d:e:f:g:h] 
with
.IR localiphost .
This is done before
.IR rcpthosts .
.TP 5
.I morercpthosts
Extra allowed RCPT domains.
If
.I rcpthosts
and
.I morercpthosts
both exist,
.I morercpthosts
is effectively appended to
.IR rcpthosts .

You must run
.B qmail-newmrh
whenever
.I morercpthosts
changes.

Rule of thumb for large sites:
Put your 50 most commonly used domains into
.IR rcpthosts ,
and the rest into
.IR morercpthosts .
.TP 5
.I mailfromrules
Acceptable "Mail From:" addresses for
RELAYCLIENTs are included here. Use
.B qmail-mfrules
to derive
.TP 5
.I mailfromrules.cdb
from
.IR mailfromrules .
.TP 5
.I rcpthosts
Allowed RCPT domains.
If
.I rcpthosts
is supplied,
.B qmail-smtpd
will reject
any envelope recipient address with a domain not listed in
.IR rcpthosts .

Exception:
If the environment variable RELAYCLIENT is set,
.B qmail-smtpd
will ignore
.IR rcpthosts ,
and will append the value of RELAYCLIENT
to each incoming recipient address.

.I rcpthosts
may include wildcards:

.EX
   heaven.af.mil
   .heaven.af.mil
.EE

Envelope recipient addresses without @ signs are
always allowed through.
.TP 5
.I recipients
List of external resources providing acceptable,
full-qualified envelope addresses
(\'RCPT to: <recip@domain>\')
to be used for recipient verification
during the SMTP session.

The external sources can be either
.B fastforward
compliant cdbs including the envelope addresses,
where the path to a cdb has to be referenced
relative to Qmail's home directory - or -
.B checkpassword
compatible Plugable Authentication Modules
(PAM), receiving the envelope address on FD 3
as 'recip@domain\\0\\0\\0' and returning '0'
in a case of success and '1' in case of failure.
The use of a PAM is indicated with a delimiting '|' and
it will be called with up to five additional parameters;
while a cdb follows a ':', which can be omitted.

The list of external sources is consulted line-by-line for each
recipient envelope address until the first positive answer,
or a final negative response is encountered.
Which external source to be queried, depends on the domain part of the
recipient envelope address specified on the left side of the
.I recipients
file, while the external resource is provided right from the delimitor.

The addresses' domain part is evaluted in lower-case.
An exact domain match can be encompassed by means of a leading '@'.
The '*' is a generic wildcard for all domains.
Specific domains can be excluded from the lookup by means of a
leading '!'; thus all recipient addresses are accepted for this domain.
Additionally, a '!*' can be used as wildcard for all domains not encountered
before in 
.I recipients 
(pass-thru).

A
.I recipients
file is always constructed like 'domain:cdb','domain|pam',
or simply 'cdb':

.EX
   !nocheck.com
   @mydomain.com:users/recipients.cdb
   example.com|bin/qmail-smtpam mx.example.com
   *:etc/fastforward.cdb
   *|PATH/ldapam ldapserver host port DN passwd
   !*
.EE

Lagacy format:

.EX
   users/recipients.cdb
   etc/fastforward.cdb
.EE

Note: Excluded domains starting with a '!'
should be placed in the beginning of the
.I recipients
file for performance reasons, while the pass-thru
statement '!*' has to be on the last line.
The recipients check is applied after the
.I rcpthosts
evaluation.

.B qmail-recipients
may be used to construct a
.I users/recipients.cdb
from
.IR users/recipients .

The
.B qmail-smtpd
recipients mechanism supports Qmail's address extension (VERP).
Unqualified envelope recipients are appended with \'@localhost\'.
.TP 5
.I smtpgreeting
SMTP greeting message.
Default:
.IR me ,
if that is supplied;
otherwise
.B qmail-smtpd
will refuse to run.
The first word of
.I smtpgreeting
should be the current host's name.
.TP 5
.I spfexplain
An additional SPF explanation can be given here to provide more
specific information for the sender in case of a reject. 
SPF macro expansion is possible. It will override the default one, e.g.:

.EE
See https://example.com/spfrules.html (#5.7.1)
.EX
.TP 5
.I spflocalrules
As 'last resort', it is possible to include SPF local rules here 
(on one line), that will be applied before other SPF rules would fail.  
This can be used to allow certain MX to send mails anyway. Example:

.EE
include:spf.trusted-forwarder.org
.EX
.TP 5
.I timeoutsmtpd
Number of seconds
.B qmail-smtpd
will wait for each new buffer of data from the remote SMTP client.
Default: 1200.

.SH "CONDITIONAL CONTROL FILES"
The control files \fIrcpthosts\fR, \fImorecpthosts\fR, 
\fIrecipients\fR, \fIbadhelo\fR 
are "conditional" control files and evaluated 
only if the environment variable RELAYCLIENT is not set. 
On the other hand,
\fImailfromrules.cdb\fR is only taken into account, if
RELAYCLIENT is set.
This allows 
.B qmail-smtpd
to relay mail messages from local clients and to filter 
mails with certain SMTP envelope conditions
originating from particular clients ("Split Horizon").
Other conditional control files are 
\fIbadloadertypes\fR, 
\fIbadmimetypes\fR
which depend on the setting of the corresponding 
environment variables.

Further, the control files \fIspfexplain\fR and 
\fIspflocalrules\fR are only evaluated if the 
environment variable 
.I SPF
is defined and greater than 0 and 
.I RELAYCLIENT
is not set. 

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES READ"
Environment variables may be defined globally in the
.B qmail-smtpd 
startup script and/or individually as part of the
.B tcpserver's
cdb database.
The environment variables may be quoted ("variable", or 'variable') and
in case of global use, have to be exported.
.B qmail-smtpd
supports the following legacy environment variables, typically
provided by
.B tcpserver
or
.B sslserver:
.IR TCP(6)REMOTEIP ,
.IR TCP(6)REMOTEHOST 
.IR TCP(6)REMOTEINFO 
and 
.IR TCPLOCALPORT
as well as
.IR RELAYCLIENT .
Additionally, 
.B qmail-smtpd
may use several environment variables for different purposes.
.P
Controlling the SMTP HELO/EHLO:
.IP
.TP 5
.I HELOCHECK=''
enables a check of the provided HELO/EHLO greeting against
the content of the control file
.IR badhelo .
In case no HELO/EHLO greeting is given, SMTP
connections can be rejected, if
.I HELOCHECK='!'
is set. Checks on the presence and the content of
the HELO/EHLO greeting string is facilitated, setting
.IR HELOCHECK='.' .
To enforce the match of the HELO/EHLO greeting with 
the remote host's FQDN (
.IR TCP(6)REMOTEHOST ), 
use
.IR HELOCHECK='=' .
.TP 5
.IR HELOCHECK='A' | HELOCHECK='M'
enable DNS A/MX lookup for the HELO/EHLO greeting string.
In addition, the HELO/EHLO string is checked against 
the content of
.IR badhelo .
.P
Controlling the SMTP Mail From:
.IP
.TP 5
.I LOCALMFCHECK
is used to enable a "Mail From:" address Verification (MAV) for RELAYCLIENTs.
Thus, the domain part of the "Mail From:" envelope sender address
has to match an entry in
.IR rcpthosts
or
.IR morercpthosts
control files, if not explicitly defined otherwise.

If LOCALMFCHECK='!' is set, the control file
.I mailfromrules.cdb
is evaluated and the MAV is facilitated employing the environment variables
.IR TCP(6)REMOTEINFO ,
.IR TCP(6)REMOTIP ,
or
.I TCP(6)REMOTEHOST
as a key.
However, if LOCALMFCHECK='=' is provided, 
.IR TCP(6)REMOTEINFO 
(i.e. set by Auth) has to match the "Mail From:" 
envelope address (case insensitive).
Alternativley, using LOCALMFCHECK='?' the email address
embedded in the DN of a X.509 client is used and compared 
against the "Mail From:" envelope address.
Of course, this requires
.B sslserver
to request a client cert for mutual authentication.

Note: Adding a qualifier to LOCALMFCHCEK,
the domain part of the "Mail From:" address is compared
against the provided string.
.TP 5
.IR MFDNSCHECK
enable DNS MX lookup for the domain part of the "Mail From:" envelope sender address.
.TP 5
.I SPF='0'|'1'|'2'|'3'|'4'|'5'|'6'
SPF Records will be evaluated for the current SMTP session in case
.B SPF
is defined. The value of 
.B SPF
may be given between 1 and 6 to enable SPF checks.
.I 1 
selects 'annotate-only' mode, where
.B qmail-smtpd
will annotate incoming email with a
.B Received-SPF
header, but will not reject any messages.  
.I 2 
will produce temporary failures on DNS lookup problems 
so you can be sure always to have a meaningful Received-SPF header.  
.I 3 
selects 'reject' mode, where incoming mail will be rejected 
if the SPF record says 'fail'.  
.I 4
selects a more stricter rejection mode, which is like 'reject' mode,
except that incoming mail will also be rejected, when the SPF record
says 'softfail'. Further,
.I 5 
will reject when the SPF record says 'neutral', and 
.I 6 
rejects, if no SPF records are available at all 
(or a syntax error was encountered).
If 
.B SPF 
is given as 
.IR 0 ,
SPF checks are disabled.

Note: Additional control files are
.I spfexplain 
and
.IR spflocalrules .

.P
Controlling the SMTP RCPT TO:
.IP
.TP 5
.I MAXRECIPIENTS
is the number of Rcpt To:'s
.B qmail-smtpd
will accept in a SMTP session.
If MAXRECIPIENTS ist not set, any number is allowed.
.TP 5
.IR TARPITCOUNT
is the number of Rcpt To:
.B qmail-smtpd
accepts before it starts tarpitting.
Default: 0 which means no tarpitting.
.TP 5
.IR TARPITDELAY
tarpitdelay is the time in seconds of delay
to be introduced after each subsequent Rcpt To:.

Smart Rejection Notes:
If
.IR TARPITCOUNT
is set and
.IR TARPITDELAY
= 0 (default)
.B qmail-smtpd
will issue after recognising
.IR TARPITCOUNT
invalid Rcpt To: a Recipient failure;
thus additional Rcpt Tos will not be accepted.
If, however
.IR TARPITCOUNT
is set and
.IR TARPITDELAY
= 999
.B qmail-smtpd
will issue after
.IR TARPITCOUNT
invalid Rcpt To: a Recipient failure
.TP 5 
.I RECIPIENTS450
tells
.b qmail-smtpd
to issue a SMTP reply '450' (temporary rejection) 
instead the default '550'
in case the recipient was not listed in any
.I recipients 
cdb.
.TP 5
.I REPLYMAV
allows the setting of customized SMTP reply messages in case
of a MAV mismatch.
.P
Controlling the email body:
.IP
.TP 5
.I BADLOADERTYPE='c'
tells
.B qmail-smtpd
to evalute the control file
.I badloadertypes.cdb
with the starting string 'c'.
If 
.I BADLOADERTYPE='-'
is set, the check is disabled.
In case
.I BADLOADERTYPE='+'
is defined, the check is disabled for
.IR RELAYCLIENTS .
.TP 5
.I BADMIMETYPE
see control file
.IR badmimetypes.cdb .
In case
.I BADMIMETYPE='-'
is set; 
.I badmimetypes.cdb 
is not considered; thus the check is disabled.
Providing
.I BADMIMTETYPE='+'
the check is disabled if in addition
.IR RELAYCLIENTS 
are recognized.

.TP 5
.I BASE64
tells QHPSI to enable virus checking only if a base64 encoded
attachment was identified.
.TP 5
.I DATABYTES
see control file
.IR databytes .
.TP 5
.I QHPSI
is used by 
.B qmail-smtpd
to supply the name of the virus scanner and it's path.
.P
Environment variables for SMTP authentication: 
.IP
.TP 5
.I SMTPAUTH
is used to enable SMTP Authentication for the 
Auth types
LOGIN and PLAIN.
In case
.TP 5
.I SMTPAUTH='+cram'
is defined,
.B qmail-smtpd
honors LOGIN, PLAIN, and additionally CRAM-MD5 authentication.
Simply
.TP 5
.I SMTPAUTH='cram'
restricts authentication just to CRAM-MD5.
If however
.TP 5
.I SMTPAUTH='!'
starts with an exclamation mark, Auth is required. 
You can enforce 'Submission' using this option 
and binding
.B qmail-smtpd
to the SUBMISSION port \'587'\.
In particular,
.TP 5
.I SMTPAUTH='!cram'
may be useful.
In opposite, if
.TP 5
.I SMTPAUTH='-'
starts with a dash, Auth disabled for particular
connections.
Note: The use of 'cram' requires a CRAM-MD5 enabled PAM.
.P
Setting up the TLS/STARTTLS environment:
.IP
.TP 5
.I UCSPITLS
enables encrypted SMTP communication 
via STARTTLS in case 
.B sslserver
is provided.
If
.I UCSPITLS='!'
is set, STARTTLS is required; while setting
.I UCSPITLS='-'
disables STARTTLS.
Further, 
.I UCSPITLS='?'
may be used to force the client to present a X.509 cert 
for authentication purpose which may be refined 
requesting
.I UCSPITLS='@' 
to additionally fetch the email address
from the client's cert to be perhaps subject of 
.IR LOCALMFCHECK .
.P
Other environment variables used:
.IP
.TP 5
.I DELIVERTO
mail address for special recipients.
.TP 5
.I RBLSMTPD
feed from 
.B rblsmtpd
including the information received from the
inquired RBL hosts and displayed as
.I X-RBL-Info: 
message header.

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES SET"
By means of the following environment variables, 
the SMTP session an be interrogated:
.TP 5
.I HELOHOST
the HELO/EHLO greeting of the SMTP client.
.TP 5
.I AUTHPROTOCOL
the ESMTPA protocol used for authentication.
.TP 5
.I AUTHUSER
the supplied username for authentication.
.TP 5
.I MAILFROM
containes the received "Mail From:" address.
.TP 5
.I RCPTTO
containes all received "Rcpt To:" addresses separated by blanks.
.TP 5
.I TCP(6)REMOTEINFO
in authentication mode set to the accepted username.
.TP 5
.I SSL_*
information from
.BR sslserver ,
if applicable.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
tcp-environ(5),
qmail-control(5),
qmail-inject(8),
qmail-newmrh(8),
qmail-newbmt(8),
qmail-authuser(8),
qmail-recipients(8),
qmail-smtpam(8),
qmail-mfrules(8),
qmail-queue(8),
qmail-remote(8),
qmail-send(8),
qmail-log(8),
tcpserver(8),
sslserver(8).

