.TH s/qmail: qmail-mrtg 8

.SH NAME
qmail-mrtg \- prepare s/qmail logs for MRTG analysis
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qmail-mrtg  [ -1 | -2 | -3 | -4 | -5 | -6 | -a | -b | -c | -d | -e | -f | -g | -h | -i | -j | -z | -A | -B ] [time]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B qmail-mrtg
reads the 
.B multilog
tagged 
.B s/qmail 
logs with TAI64N timestamps on standard input 
to produce a counter for specifc 
.B s/qmail 
events and display them on standard output
suitable for MRTG processing.

.SH USAGE
.B qmail-mrtg
can be used to analyse 
.BR qmail-send ,
.BR qmail-smtpd ,
and
.B qmail-pop3d
logs in order to feed the results into MRTG. 

Typically,
.B qmail-mrtg
is called by the 
.B crontab
facility together with a configuration files telling
.B qmail-mrtg
what to analyse.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.B qmail-mrtg
posses three different sets of commands.
Reading
.B qmail-send
logs:
.I -1 
Deliveries/TLS transmitted,
.I -2  
Message KBytes enqueued,
.I -3 
Local/Remote Concurrency, 
.I -4
Failure/Deferred Messages,
.I -5 
Bounces/Triple bounces,
.I -6 
qmtp/qmtps Messages.

.B qmail-smtpd
logs:
.I -a 
total sessions,
.I -b 
accepted/rejected sessions,
.I -c 
rejected sessions (MTA),
.I -d 
rejected originator,
.I -e 
rejected recipient,
.I -f 
rejected data (Mime + Loader),
.I -g 
rejected data (Virus + Spam),
.I -h 
authenticated sessions, 
.I -i 
accepted/rejected TLS sessions,
.I -j 
recognized/rejected SPF sessions.
Summaries are provided by
.I -z 
total sessions, including 
.B qmail-smtpd 
and
.BR tcpserver /
.BR sslserver /
.BR rblsmtpd .

.BR qmail-pop3d /
.B qmail-popup
logs:
.I -A 
accepted/rejected POP3 user,
.I -B 
.BR qmail-pop3d / 
.BR tcpserver /
.B sslserver 
connections.

The intervalls to evaluate the information given on STDIN 
defaults to
.IR 300 secs
and can be changed by the second argument for 
.BR qmail-mrtg .

.SH "CONFIGURATION FILES"
.B qmail-mrtg
depends on a configuration file for each service.
Sample configuration files are provided.

.SH "CRON INVOCATION"
Since 
.B qmail-mrtg
typically is invoked by the
.B cron 
facility, additional information neeeds to be supplied:

.EX
  */5 * * * * env LANG=C mrtg /etc/qmail-mrtg.send.cfg &>/dev/null
  */5 * * * * env LANG=C mrtg /etc/qmail-mrtg.smtpd.cfg &>/dev/null
  */5 * * * * env LANG=C mrtg /etc/qmail-mrtg.pop3d.cfg &>/dev/null
.EE

.SH "SEE ALSO"
mrtg(1),
crontab(5),
cron(8),
qmail-log(8),
qmail-send(8),
qmail-smtpd(8),
qmail-popup(8).


