.TH s/qmail: qmail-log 5
.SH NAME
qmail-log \- s/qmail activity record
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B qmail-send
prints a series of lines describing its activities.
Each possible line is described below.
.SH "STATUS"
.TP
.B status: local \fIl\fR/\fIL\fR remote \fIr\fR/\fIR\fR ...
.B qmail-send
is waiting for
.I l
local deliveries
and
.I r
remote deliveries.
The concurrency limits are
.I L
and
.IR R .
.TP
.B status: exiting
.B qmail-send
is done.
.SH "FATAL PROBLEMS"
.TP
.B alert: cannot start: ...
.B qmail-send
is unable to prepare itself for delivering messages;
it is giving up.
This normally indicates a serious configuration error,
but it can be caused by a temporary lack of resources.
.TP
.B alert: oh no! lost ...
One of the other daemons has died.
.B qmail-send
will exit as soon as possible.
.SH "SERIOUS PROBLEMS"
.TP
.B alert: unable to append to bounce message...
.B qmail-send
is unable to record a permanent failure,
usually because the disk is full.
This is a very serious problem;
.B qmail-send
cannot proceed without recording the results.
It will try again in ten seconds.
.TP
.B alert: out of memory...
.B qmail-send
tried to allocate more memory and failed.
It will try again in ten seconds.
.TP
.B alert: unable to opendir...
.B qmail-send
is having trouble reading a file list from disk,
usually because the system's file descriptor table is full,
but possibly because permissions are set incorrectly.
It will try again in ten seconds.
.TP
.B alert: unable to switch back...
.B qmail-send
was sent SIGHUP,
and it is unable to reenter the queue directory.
This is a very serious problem;
.B qmail-send
cannot proceed outside the queue directory.
It will try again in ten seconds.
.TP
.B alert: unable to reread...
.B qmail-send
was sent SIGHUP,
but it is unable to read the new controls.
It will continue operating with the original controls.
.SH "MESSAGES"
.TP
.B new msg \fIm\fR
.B qmail-send
is going to preprocess a queued message.
The message number,
.IR m ,
is its disk inode number.
After a message is removed from the queue,
its number can be reused immediately.
.TP
.B info msg \fIm\fR: bytes \fIb\fR from <\fIs\fR> qp \fIq\fR uid \fIu\fR
Message
.I m
contains
.I b
bytes;
its envelope sender is
.IR s ;
it was queued by a user with user ID
.IR u .
.I q
is a long-term queue identifier,
the process ID of the
.B qmail-queue
that queued the message.
.TP
.B bounce msg \fIm\fR qp \fIq\fR
Message
.I m
had some delivery failures.
The long-term queue identifier of the bounce (or double-bounce) message
is
.IR q .
.TP
.B double bounce: discarding ...
Message
.I m
was discarded due to an \'empty\' recipient in 
.
.IR doublebounceto .
.TP
.B triple bounce: discarding ...
Message
.I m
had some delivery failures,
but it is already a double-bounce message,
so it must be thrown away.
Triple-bounce messages do not exist.
.TP
.B end msg \fIm\fR
.B qmail-send
is about to remove
message
.I m
from the queue.
.SH "DELIVERIES"
.TP
.B starting delivery \fId\fR: msg \fIm\fR to ...
.B qmail-send
is telling
.B qmail-lspawn
or
.B qmail-rspawn
to deliver message
.I m
to one recipient.
The delivery number,
.IR d ,
starts at 1 and increases by 1 for each new delivery.
.TP
.B delivery \fId\fR: success: ...
Delivery
.I d
was successful.
.TP
.B delivery \fId\fR: failure: ...
Delivery
.I d
failed permanently.
The message will bounce.
.TP
.B delivery \fId\fR: deferral: ...
Delivery
.I d
failed temporarily.
This recipient will be retried later.
.TP
.B delivery \fId\fR: report mangled, will defer
There is a serious bug in
.B qmail-lspawn
or
.BR qmail-rspawn .
This recipient will be retried later.
.SH "WARNINGS"
.TP
.B internal error: delivery report out of range
.B qmail-lspawn
or
.B qmail-rspawn
has supplied a report on a nonexistent delivery.
This is a serious bug.
.TP
.B qmail-clean unable to clean up ...
For some reason
.B qmail-clean
is unable to remove the indicated file.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B trouble fsyncing ...
.B qmail-send
was unable to write to disk the results of preprocessing a queued message.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B trouble in select
There is an operating system bug.
.TP
.B trouble injecting bounce message...
.B qmail-send
was unable to queue a bounce message,
usually because the disk is full.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B trouble marking ...
.B qmail-send
was unable to record the result of a successful or permanently
unsuccessful delivery.
This means that the delivery will be tried again later.
.TP
.B trouble opening ...
.B qmail-send
was unable to open the list of local or remote recipients
for a message.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B trouble reading ...
Either
.B qmail-send
is unable to read a recipient list,
or it is unable to read the envelope of a queued
message, or it is out of memory.
Whatever it was doing, it will try again later.
.TP
.B trouble writing to ...
.B qmail-send
was unable to preprocess a queued message,
usually because the disk is full.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B unable to create ...
.B qmail-send
was unable to preprocess a queued message,
usually because the disk is out of inodes.
It will try again later.
.TP unable to create .... [info,delivery]
.B qmail-send 
could not setup a valid file descriptor.
This is a fatal error.
.TP
.B unable to open ...
.B qmail-send
is unable to read the envelope of a queued message
for preprocessing.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B unable to start qmail-queue...
.B qmail-send
is unable to queue a bounce message,
usually because the machine is almost out of memory.
It will try again later.
This can also be caused by incorrect settings of
.B $QMAILQUEUE
or errors in a program or script which
.B $QMAILQUEUE
+points to.
.TP
.B unable to stat ...
.B qmail-send
is unable to obtain information about a file that should exist.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B unable to unlink ...
.B qmail-send
is unable to remove a file.
It will try again later.
.TP
.B unable to utime ...
.B qmail-send
is about to exit,
and it is unable to record on disk
the next scheduled delivery time for a message.
The message will be retried as soon as
.B qmail-send
is restarted.
.TP
.B unknown record type in ...
There is a serious bug in either
.B qmail-queue
or
.BR qmail-send .

.SH "UNIFIED SMTPD/POP3D LOGGING"
.B qmail-smtpd
and
.B qmail-popup
log additional information in a unified extensible format
\fIAction::Type::Condition\fR \fIInformation\fR.

.B Action 
is either
.IR Reject , 
.IR Accept ,
or additionally
.IR Info .

The
.B Type
belongs to the following information:
.TP
.I SNDR 
the client's hostname, 
.TP
.I SPF 
indicating SPF validation, 
.TP
.I TLS 
labeling TLS connections, 
.TP
.I AUTH
for Authenticated sessions. Further
.TP
.I ORIG
relates to the return path \fIF:<Return-Path>\fR, and 
.TP
.I RCTP 
to the forwarding path \fIT:<Forwarding-Path>\fR, and finally
.TP
.I DATA  
to the message.

.TP 0
The following \fBConditions\fR are provided:
.TP 4
.I Bad_Helo
the client's HELO/EHLO greeting string was found in 
.IR badhelo
or rejected because of one of the following conditions indicated
in the information section: '!' (HELO/EHLO not provided/empty)
, '\.'/'*' (HELO/EHLO rejected due to a direct/wildmat match with entries in
.IR badhelo ).
.TP
.I Bad_Loader
the content of a base64 encoded MIME part matched an
entry in 
.IR badloadertypes.cdb .
.TP
.I Bad_MIME
a base64 encoded MIME part matched an entry n
.IR badmimetypes.cdb . 
.TP
.I Bad_Mailfrom 
the provided <Return-Path> matched an entry in
.I badmailfrom 
additionally with the rejection conditions: '@' (address), '*'
(wildmat), '-' (badmailfromunknown), and '+' (spoofing). 
.TP
.I Bad_Rcptto
the provided <Forwarding-Path> matched an entry in
.IR badrcptto .
.TP 
.I DNS_Helo 
the client's HELO/EHLO greeting did not match it's
FQDN or no DNS A/MX RR was found as indicated with the 
following symbols: '=' (HELO/EHLO does not match 
.BR TCPREMOTEHOST )
, 'A' (DNS A-Name lookup failed for HELO/EHLO)
, 'M' (DNS MX lookup failed for HELO/EHLO).
.TP
.I DNS_MF 
no DNS MX RR was found for the <Return-Path>.
.TP 
.I Failed_Rcptto
the <Forwarding-Path> did not match entry in the provdided
cdbs as per
.IR recipients .
.TP
.I Invalid_Relay 
the none-RELAYCLIENT provided a <Forwarding-Path> not
allowed as per
.I rcpthosts 
or 
.IR morercpthosts.cdb .
.TP
.I Invalid_Sender
the <Return-Path> of a RELAYCLIENT did not match the 
provided value of LOCALMFCHECK or did not match against
.I mailfromrules.cdb
or was not found in 
.I rcpthosts
or 
.IR morercpthosts.cdb . 
.TP
.I Invalid_Size 
the message size exceeded the maximum as provided by
DATEBYTES or 
.IR databytes .
.TP
.I Toomany_Rcptto 
the number of Recipients ('RCPT TO:') exaggerated the
value provided as MAXRECPIENTS.
.TP
.I Cipher
TLS session used this cipher.
.TP 
.I Missing
depending on the context, either the required
Start-TLS or AUTH s/qmail: is not granted.
.TP
.I Pam
SMTP authentication was granted by pam. 
.TP
.I Recipients_Rcptto
the <Forwarding-Path> matched an entry in the cdbs available per 
.IR reccients .
.TP
.I Recipients_Verp
the Forwarding-Path was recogized as VERP and matched an entry
in the cdbs available per
.IR recipients .
.TP 
.I Recipients_Domain
the Forwarding-Path matched a wildcard domain entry in the cdbs
available per
.IR recipients .
.TP 
.I Rcpthosts_Rcptto
the domain part of the <Forwarding-Path> matched an entry in
.I rcpthosts
or
.IR morercpthosts.cdb .

.TP 0
The displayed \fBInformation\fR:

.TP 4
.I P:protocol
the effective SMTP or POP3 protocol in use.
.TP
.I S:IP:FQDN
the sender's IP and FQDN address available via
TCPREMOTEIP(6) and TCPREMOTEHOST.
.TP
.I H:string
the client's HELO/EHLO greeting string.
.TP
.I F:Return-Path
the provided 'MAIL FROM:' address (if any).
.TP
.I T:Forwarding-Path
the given 'RCPT TO:' address.
.TP
.I ?~ 'userid' 
in case of authentication the provided userid.
.TP
.I != 'DN'
in case of a TLS session, the presented client's
\'Subject\' Distinguished Name (DN) - if available
(otherwise \'unknown\').

.SH "SEE ALSO"
qmail-send(8),
qmail-smtpd(8),
qmail-control(9)
