.TH s/qmail: qmail-authuser 8

.SH "NAME"
qmail-authuser \- user authentication

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B qmail-authuser
.I subprogram
[
.I args ...
]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B qmail-authuser
is a versatile authentication PAM. In it's native use,
it accesses a local database or the Unix 
.I /etc/password
file (or it's shadow companion). 
In 
.BR qmail-authuser 's
alternate use, it may call a virtual domain auth handler.

.B qmail-authuser
follows 
.BR checkpassword 's
interface specification providing
LOGIN, PLAIN, and CRAM-MD5 authentication for SMTP
as well as USER and APOP for POP3 in addition with
the required environment settings.

The information supplied on descriptor 3
is a authuser name terminated by \e0,
a password or response terminated by \e0,
and a challenge for CRAM-MD5 authentication terminated by \e0.
There must be at most 512 bytes of data before end of file.

.SH "FILES"
.I HOME/users/authuser 
contains pairs of 
.I authuser 
and 
.I password 
tokens separated by a colon (":"). 
Both tokens may include white spaces (if supported by the OS) and may
use special characters for certain actions. The provided 
.I password
token should have a significant length (> 2 characters).

Lines starting with the \'#\' sign are regarded as comment.
Trailing empty spaces in lines are removed prior of evaluation.

The file
.I HOME/users/authuser
shall be
.I root
owned and belong to group
.IR sqmail .

.SH "AUTHUSER"
The 
.I authuser
token is the public part of the identity and
may include a composit information, typically the 
.I userid 
and the 
.I domain
respectively, described as
.IR userid@domain .
.B qmail-authuser
may consider both parts independently.
Domain specific authentication can be triggered
including the information
.I @domain
as 
.I authuser 
token. However, as an abbreviation, 
this may be provided simply as
.IR @ ,
telling 
.B qmail-authuser
to consider all unspecified authusers solely and transparently 
as \'virtual users\'.
On the other hand, the
.I authuser
token may be wildcarded as
.IR * .
Now, 
.B qmail-authuser 
is instructed to query the local Unix system for authentication.

More specific 
.I authuser
tokens have precedence over less specific, irrespectively of their order.
Particular users and domains can be disabled from authentication 
prepending the name with a \'!\', which has precedence over acceptance:
.IR !authuser .

.B qmail-authuser
support thus (1) local email users, (2) Unix system users, and 
(3) virtual domain users alltogether.

.SH "NATIVE USE"
.B qmail-authuser
recalculates the MD5 digest using the provided plain challenge
and the passwords from
.IR HOME/users/authuser 
and compares it with response (2nd parameter). If they are the same,
.B qmail-authuser
uses
.B pathexec
to run
.B subprogram
with the given arguments and perhaps setting up the user environment.
The use of
.B subprogram 
is required and can be expressed as
.B /bin/true
or 
.B /usr/bin/true
for compliance reasons.

If no challenge is provided,
.B qmail-authuser 
compares the supplied password with the stored 
.I password 
token in 
.IR HOME/users/authuser .
Thus, 
.B qmail-authuser 
can be used as a generic checkpassword program for PLAIN & LOGIN auth methods.

.B qmail-authuser
may also been used as a replacement for the
.B checkpassword
PAM, allowing to evaluate the 
.I /etc/passwd
and 
.I shadow
files for the auth methods USER, PLAIN & LOGIN.
In this case,
.B qmail-authuser
has to be \'sticky\' and running as 
.IR root .
Depending on the provided 
.I password 
token, the Unix environment will be evaluated and setup.

.SH "ALTERNATE USE"
.B qmail-authuser
includes the call of both
.IR vpopmail 's
.B vchkpw
and
.IR vmailmgr 's
.B checkvpw 
(which need to be in the path) 
and transfers the received authentication information transparently to those.

.SH "QUERY AND STORAGE METHODS"
The first character 
.I X
of the 
.I password 
token is used to indicate the password's query and storage method. 
The following cases may be considered:

.EX
  (1a) authuser:clearpwd
  (1b) authuser:%pwdhash
  (2a) authuser:?
  (2b) authuser:!
  (2c) *:?
  (2d) *:!
  (3a) authuser:+
  (3b) @domain:+
  (3c) @:+
  (4a) authuser:&
  (4b) @domain:&
  (4c) @:&
.EE

(1) Local query/storage:
Here, together with the 
.I authuser
plaintext (1a) or hashed passwords (1b)
may be provided in the
.I HOME/users/authuser
control file.
In case of
.IR %pwdhash ,
the password is stored as MD5 hash following the \'%\'.
If the plaintext password is given as
.I password
this means, that the following password is taken literally
and may include a leading \'%\',  

(2) Unix system query/storage:
In case the 
.I password 
token consists of
.IR ? ,
the received authentication information is used to trigger a 
standard Unix login user query taking the 
.I userid
information as system user account. Therefore, no particular
.I password 
token is required here.
If instead
.IR !
is used, additionally, the Unix user environment will
be evaluated and setup according to the 
.B checkpassword
implementation, allowing
.B qmail-authuser 
to be used for 
.B qmail-popup 
and 
.B qmail-pop3d
services.
The inclusion of any specific 
.I authuser
information can be avoided in case
.I *
is used as shortcut within
.I HOME/users/authuser
followed by either
.I ?
or 
.I !
as 
.I password 
token. Now, the received
.I userid 
and password is fed automatically to the Unix system for authentication.

(3,4) Virtual domain query/storage:
Alternatively, 
.B qmail-authuser
may call either 
.B checkvpw
once a 
.I +
or
.B vchkpw
in case 
.I &
is given as 
.I password 
token.

All authentication storage and query mechanism
can be used concurrently, depending on the settings
of the
.I authuser
and 
.I password
token in
.IR HOME/users/authuser .

.SH "EXIT CODES"
In case the provided
.I authuser
or 
.I userid
does not exist, or the MD5 digest and the response, 
or the passwords
differ,
.B qmail-authuser
exits 1.
If
.B qmail-authuser
is misused, it may instead exit 2.
If there is a temporary problem checking the password,
.B qmail-authuser
exits 111.

.SH "SECURITY"
.B qmail-authuser
is invoked in the environment of 
.B qmail-smtpd 
or 
.B qmail-popup
which is typically run as user 
.IR qmaild .
Therefore,
.I HOME/users/authuser
shall be readable only by this user. The included
.I password
token shall solely be used for SMTP/POP3 authentication
and should possess enough entropy. 

A sticky and root-owned
.B qmail-authuser
is a potential security risk.

.SH "PASSWORD HASHES"
Instead of plaintext passwords, additionally
MD5 hashes of the passwords may be used. However, 
in spite of rainbow tables this requires none-trival
passwords.  Currenty,
.B qmail-authuser
only supports MD5 hashed passwords having 32 hex characters length.
Other methods, like SHA1 and SHA256, may be supported in the future
but don't solve the problem of rainbow tables to reverse the hash.

.SH "AUTH METHODS"
In case hashed passwords or the UNIX passwords are used,
only the auth methods USER, PLAIN, and LOGIN are working.
Those methods are only secure on encrypted 
connections and otherwise are easy victim of an eavesdropper.
Challenge/Response methods - like CRAM-MD5 and APOP -
require having access to the plain-text passwords. For
.B vchkpw
C/R is possible querying the local \'vpopmail\' database.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
qmail-popup(8),
qmail-smtpd(8),
checkpassword(8),
vchkpw(8),
checkvpw(8).
