.TH s/qmail: qmal-remote 8
.SH NAME
qmail-remote \- send mail via SMTP(S) or QMTP(S)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qmail-remote
.I host
.I sender
.I recip
[
.I recip ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B qmail-remote
reads a mail message from its input
and sends the message
to one or more recipients
at a remote host.

The remote host is
.BR qmail-remote 's
first argument,
.IR host .
.B qmail-remote
sends the message to
.IR host ,
or to a mail exchanger for
.I host
listed in the Domain Name System,
via the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP/ESMTP) 
perhaps encrypted via STARTTLS/TLS
or the Quick Mail Transfer Protocol (QMTP/QMTPS).
.I host
can be either a fully-qualified domain name:

.EX
     silverton.berkeley.edu
.EE

or an IPv4 or IPv6  address enclosed in brackets:

.EX
     [128.32.183.163]
     [2001::163]
.EE
 
In case the primary mail exchanger for that Domain
will issue a 5xy reply message during the connection,
.B qmail-remote
will contact all responsible mail exchangers in turn
in order to deliver the message anyway.

The envelope recipient addresses are listed as
.I recip
arguments to
.BR qmail-remote .
The envelope sender address is listed as
.I sender\fP.

Note that
.B qmail-remote
does not take options
and does not follow the
.B getopt
standard.

.SH TRANSPARENCY
End-of-file in SMTP is encoded as dot CR LF.
A dot at the beginning of a line is encoded as dot dot.
It is impossible in SMTP to send a message that does not end with a newline.
.B qmail-remote
converts the UNIX newline convention into the SMTP newline convention
by inserting CR before each LF.

It is a violation of the SMTP protocol
to send a message that contains long lines or non-ASCII characters.
However,
.B qmail-remote
will happily send such messages.
It is the user's responsibility to avoid generating illegal messages.
.SH "RESULTS"
.B qmail-remote
prints some number of 
.I recipient reports\fP,
followed by a
.I message report\fR.
Each report is terminated by a 0 byte.
Each report begins with a single letter:
.TP 5
r
Recipient report: acceptance.
.TP 5
h
Recipient report: permanent rejection.
.TP 5
s
Recipient report: temporary rejection.
.TP 5
K
Message report: success.
.I host
has taken responsibility for delivering the message to each
acceptable recipient.
.TP 5
Z
Message report: greylisted or temporary failure.
.TP 5
D
Message report: permanent failure.
.PP
After this letter comes a human-readable description of
what happened.

.B qmail-remote
may use SMTP Authenticaton to connect to remote hosts.
The following reports are provided:
.TP 5
K
no supported AUTH s/qmail: method found, continuing without authentication.
.TP 5
Z
Connected to 
.I host
but authentication was rejected (AUTH s/qmail: PLAIN).
.TP 5
Z
Connected to 
.I host 
but unable to base64encode (plain).
.TP 5
Z
Connected to 
.I host
but authentication was rejected (plain). 
.TP 5
Z
Connected to
.I host
but authentication was rejected (AUTH s/qmail: LOGIN).
.TP 5
Z
Connected to 
.I host
but unable to base64encode user.
.TP 5
Z
Connected to 
.I host 
but authentication was rejected (username).
.TP 5
Z
Connected to 
.I host 
but unable to base64encode pass.
.TP 5
Z
Connected to
.I host
but authentication was rejected (AUTH s/qmail: CRAM-MD5).
.TP 5
Z
Connected to
.I host
but unable to base64decode challenge.
.TP 5
Z
Connected to
.I host
but unable to base64encode username+digest.
.TP 5
Z
Connected to
.I host
but authentication was rejected (username+digest).
.PP
The recipient reports will always be printed in the same order as
.BR qmail-remote 's
.I recip
arguments.
Note that in failure cases there may be fewer
recipient reports
than
.I recip
arguments.
.PP
In case a CNAME can not be resovled 
.B qmail-remote
issues the following message:
.TP 5
Z
CNAME lookup failed temporarily for:
.IR host . 
.PP
If a SMTP connection is bound to a none-existing IP address
.B qmail-remote
will complain with the message:
.TP 5
Z
System resources temporarily unavailable.
.TP 5
Z
System can't bind to local ip address:
.IR ip .
.PP
In case a QMTP connection can not be established 
.B qmail-remote
will issue the error message:
.TP 5
Z 
recipient
.I host
did not talk proper QMTP.
.PP
On demand
.B qmail-remote
supports TLS/STARTTLS and will use the following messages:
.TP 5
K
TLS transmitted message accepted.
.TP 5
Z
Can't load X.509 certificate:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
Can't load X.509 private key:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to create TLS context for
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to process the TLS ciphers:
.IR ciphers .
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to setup CAFILE:
.I cafile
or CADIR:
.I cadir
for TLS.
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to establish a TLS connection with:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to gracefully close the TLS connection with: 
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
Unable to obtain X.500 certificate from:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
Unable to verify X.500 certificate from:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
Unable to validate X.500 certificate Subject for:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
Received X.500 certificate from
.I host 
does not match provided fingerprint: 
.IR SHA-1\ fingerprint .
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to establish a TLS connection with:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to gracefully close the TLS connection with:
.IR host .
.TP 5
Z
I wasn't able to negotiate a TLS connection with:
.IR host .

.PP
.B qmail-remote
always exits zero.

.SH "CONTROL FILES"
.TP 5
.I authsenders
Authenticated sender.
For each
.I sender 
included in 
.IR authsenders :
.I sender\fB:\fIrelay\fB;\fIport\fB|\fIuser\fB|\fIpassword 
.B qmail-remote
will try SMTP Authentication 
of type CRAM-MD5, LOGIN, or PLAIN 
with the provided user name
.I user 
and password
.I password 
(the authentication information) 
and eventually relay the 
mail through
.I relay
on port
.IR port .
The use of 
.I relay
and 
.I port 
follows the same rules as for
.IR smtproutes 
Note: In case
.I sender
is empty, 
.B qmail-remote
will try to deliver each outgoing mail 
SMTP authenticated. If the authentication
information is missing, the mail is 
delivered none-authenticated.
.I authsenders
can be constructed as follows:

.EX
   @example.com:relay.example.com|user|passwd
   info@example.com:relay.example.com;26|infouser|infopasswd
   :mailrelay.example.com|e=mc2|testpass
.EE
.TP 5
.I domaincerts
In case
.B qmail-remote
needs to present a client certificate to the server 
(for authentication purposes) the PEM encoded 
X.509 certificate can be provided per sending domain:
.IR domain\fB:\fIcertificate\fB|\fIkeyfile\fB|\fIpassword .
If 
.I domain
equals '*' this
.I certificate
is used as default.
The file 
.I certificate 
may include the private key, thus 
.I keyfile
can be omitted. Additionally, the private key can be protected with a
.IR password .

.TP 5
.I domainips
IP addresses to be used for outgoing connections.
Each line has the form
.IR domain\fB:\fIlocalip(%ifname)\fB|\fIhelohost ,
without any extra spaces.
If
.I domain
matches the domain part in
.IR sender ,
.B qmail-remote
will bind to
.IR localip
when connecting to
.IR host .
LLU IPv6 addresses need to be appended with the binding 
.IR ifname
following
.IR localip 
with a '%'.
If it matches, it will set the provided HELO string as greeting; 
otherwise, it will use the default.
.I domain 
can be the wildcard
.I *
in which case 
.B qmail-remote
binds to the provided address for any sender domain name.
.TP 5
.I helohost
Current host name,
for use solely in saying ehlo/hello to the remote SMTP server.
Default:
.IR me ,
if that is supplied;
otherwise
.B qmail-remote
refuses to run.
.TP 5
.I qmtproutes
Additional QMTP routes which have precedence over
.IR smtproutes .
QMTP routes should obey the form
.IR domain\fB:\fIrelay\fB;\fIport ,
without any extra spaces.
.I qmtproutes
follows the same syntax as
.IR smtproutes .
By default, 
.B qmail-remote
connects to QMTP service port 209. However
you can chose a dedicated high-port for QMTP communication
as defined in
.IR qmtproutes .
In case the QMTP port is chosen to be
.I 6209
the TLS secured QMTPS protocol will be used, 
irrespectively of the settings in 
.IR tlsdestinations .
.TP 5
.I smtproutes
Artificial SMTP routes.
Each route has the form
.I domain\fB:\fIrelay 
or 
.I domain\fB:\fIrelay\fB|\fIuser\fB|\fIpassword
without any extra spaces.
If
.I domain
matches
.IR host ,
.B qmail-remote
will connect to
.IR relay ,
as if
.I host
had
.I relay
as its only MX.
(It will also avoid doing any CNAME lookups on
.IR recip .)
.I host
may include a semi-colon and a port number to use instead of the
normal SMTP port, 25. In case, a userid and password is
present,
.B qmail-remote
will try a SMTP authenticated session:

.EX
   inside.af.mil:firewall.af.mil;26
   :submission.myrelay.com;587|myuserid|mypasswd
.EE

.I relay
may be empty;
this tells
.B qmail-remote
to look up MX records as usual.
.I smtproutes
may include wildcards:

.EX
   .af.mil:
   :heaven.af.mil
.EE

Here
any address ending with
.B .af.mil
(but not
.B af.mil
itself)
is routed by its MX records;
any other address is artificially routed to
.BR heaven.af.mil .

Additionally,
.I smtproutes 
allows to forward bounces (with a 'Nullsender' MAIL FROM: <>)
literally expressed as '!@'
to a particular bounce host:

.EX
   !@:bouncehost.af.mil;27
.EE

The
.B qmail
system does not protect you if you create an artificial
mail loop between machines.
However,
you are always safe using
.I smtproutes
if you do not accept mail from the network.
.TP 5
.I timeoutconnect
Number of seconds
.B qmail-remote
will wait for the remote SMTP server to accept a connection.
Default: 60.
The kernel normally imposes a 75-second upper limit.
.TP 5
.I timeoutremote
Number of seconds
.B qmail-remote
will wait for each response from the remote SMTP server.
Default: 1200.
.TP 5
.I tlsdestinations
If present, this file advices
.B qmail-remote
to use TLS (optinally or mandatory) encryption for specific destination domains
as provided by the forward-path and to validate/verify 
the server certificate perhaps for a particular sender's domain:
.I destination:cafile|ciphers|verifydepth;port|domain 
or
.IR destination:=fingerprint|ciphers|verifydepth;port|domain .
Unless explicitely configured,
.B qmail-remote 
accepts any or no certificate provided by the server (opportunistic encryption)
using the following (single character) rules:

.EX
   (1) -:  # allow anonymous connections
   (2) *:  # validate X.509 certs
.EE

Double character rules instruct
.B qmail-remote
to require a STARTTLS or SMTPS connection (mandatory TLS):
 
.EX
   (3) -*: # allow anonymous connections 
   (4) +*: # require X.509 certs
   (5) ~*: # cert + validate SAN/DN, however accept '*'
   (6) =*: # cert + validate SAN/DN against FQDN
.EE

Additionally, 
.B qmail-remote 
can be told to use per-domain connection settings: 

.EX
   (7) example.com:
   (8) securityfirst.com:/etc/ssl/cafile|!SSLv2:HIGH
   (9) remote.com:/etc/ssl/certdir/||3;465
  (10) mx.partner.com:/etc/ssl/partnerca||2|mydomain.net
  (11) =mx.myfriend.com:/etc/ssl/cacert||4
  (12) ~wildneighbor.net:
  (13) -adhonlydomain.com:||aNULL:!kRSA
  (14) %peer.partner.com:=E44194C56EF.....
  (15) !nosslhost.example.com:
  (16) hiddenpartner.org:;35 
.EE

The seventh line requires from
.B qmail-remote 
to demand a STARTTLS connection for any destination
address targeting domain
.IR example.com .

The eights line accepts STARTTLS connections
for
.I securityfirst.com
only, if the X.509 certificate can be verified against
the CA cert as provided via
.I /etc/ssl/cafile 
and with the acceptable ciphers 
.IR SSLv2:HIGH .

Line number nine tells 
.B qmail-remote
to use a 
.I SMTPS
connection on port
.I 465
to any host at
.I remote.com
and accept this host only, if the peer's cert
can be validated against the CA certs available 
in
.I /etc/ssl/certdir/
and does not exceed a verification depth of
.IR 3 .

Line 10 shows an example, how 
.I tlsdestinations
can be bound exclusively to a sender domain. In the shown case,
only if
.I mx.mydomain.net
is used as sender domain, 
a connection for the destination address
.I mx.partner.com
is mandatory secured by TLS with a CA cert available as
.I /etc/ssl/partnerca 
with a verification depth of
.IR 2 .

Furthermore, the sample on line 11 demonstrates the case where 
.B qmail-remote
sees a destination address concatinated with
.IR = .
Now it will only accept the certificate,
if the X.509's DN can be validated
against the FQDN of the server (by means of a DNS lookup)
and it verifies against the 
.IR cacert
CA certificate and does not exeed a verification depth of
.IR 1 .

In case a certain
.I destination
may use 'wildcard' domain names in the SAN/DN, 
.B qmail-remote
can cope with this (line 12) 
prepending the destination with a '~':
.IR ~wildneighor.net .

In the same sense (line 13), 
.B qmail-remote
may accept TLS connections based on Anonymous DH (ADH)
- where the server does not provide a cert for authentication -
once the domain name is prepended with a 
.I - 
as key encryption cipher and discards 
.I !RSA
for authentication if told so.

Certificate pinning for a particular 
.I %host
indicated by the leading character '%' is shown on line 14. 
Instead of the CA file, now the
.I =fingerprint
of the peer host certificate needs to be provided. 
The X.509 fingerprint
should prepended with an equal sign ('=') and to 
be stripped from additional colons (':'). The fingerprint
string is evaluated case-insensitive.  
.BR qmail-remote 's
certificate pinning supports SHA1, SHA224, SHA256, and SHA512
digests, determined by the length of the fingerprint given.

Finally, 
.B qmail-remote
can be instructed to omit the STARTTLS command for the recipient address
.I nosslhost.example.com 
as indicated with a leading 
.I ! 
as shown on line 15.

In case, no perticular ciphers or CA certs are
required, a colon/semi-colon ':;' can be used as shortcut (line 16).
Generally, any port can be provided after the semi-colon.
If however, 
.I port
equals 
.IR 465 , 
SMTPS will be used instead of STARTTLS and if 
.I port 
equals 
.IR 6209 , 
QMTPS is the chosen transport protocol.
The settings here overrule previous instructions.

Note that 'destination' is subject of the
forwarding rules as provided by
.IR authsenders ,
.IR qmtproutes  ,
and
.IR smtproutes .


.SH "SEE ALSO"
addresses(5),
envelopes(5),
qmail-control(5),
qmail-send(8),
qmail-smtpd(8),
qmail-smtpam(8),
qmail-tcpto(8)
