.TH s/qmail: spfquery 8
.SH NAME
spfquery \- SPF test program 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spfquery
.I sender-ip
.I sender-helo
.I envelope-from
.I [local rules]
.I [-v]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B spfquery
is a test program to allow evaluation
of 
.I SPF records
fetched on demand by means of 
.BR qmail-smtpd .

.SH "ARGUMENTS"
.B spfquery
uses the given arguments
.IR sender-ip ,
.IR sender-helo ,
and 
.I envelope-from
to perform a DNS SPF TXT lookup
and evaluates the results. 
In addition, \'local-rules\' might 
be included as 
.IR local-rules .
By means of the (last) option
.I -v
a verbose output is provided. 

.SH "RESPONSE"
The result of 
.B spfquery
shows the SPF return codes of the retrieved
information after the DNS evalution.
Additionally, the mechanisms and 
results are displayed as chain 
of resulting codes. In case the option
.I -v
is given, the received DNS SPF TXT records 
for the analysed domain are shown in raw 
format to allow further diagnostics.

.SH "SPF MECHANISMS"
.B spfquery
and of course
.B qmail-smtpd 
support all mechanisms defined in 
.IR RFC\ 7208 ,
in particular: 
.IR A/AAAA ,
.IR IPv4 ,
.IR IPv6 ,
.IR MX ,
.IR PTR ,
.IR Exists .
Nesting of SPF records - indicated by the commands
.I include: 
and
.I redirect=
- is allowed and the chain is followed.
Further,
.I exp(lanation)=
is supported.

.SH "SPF QUALIFIERS"
SPF makes uses of command and explanation qualifiers.
Command and explanation characters are:
.I +
pass (default),
.I -
fail,
.I ~
softfail,
.I ? 
neutral.

.SH "EXPLANATION CHARACTERS"
This implementation uses the following
additional explanation characters:
.I o
none,
.I u
unknown,
.I d
DNS problem (not used).

.SH "MACRO EXPANSION"
Macros (keyword) expansion is supported conforming to
.IR RFC\ 7208 .


.SH "SPF EVALUATION"
.B spfquery
provides a brief summary of results for the evaluation:
.I S
the sending IP,
.I O
the envelope-from address,
.I C
the requested domain for lookup,
.I H
the HELO/EHLO of the contacted MTA,
.I M
the SPF lookup mechanis as explained,
.I I
the included domanin for lookup,
.I D
the (re)direct to follow,
.I P
a potential problem observed.
These letters are followed by an equal sign '='
and detail the information.
.I R
is the lookup result obtained, followed by a
colon ':'.

.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
Additional DNS diagnostic routines are available:
.B dnstxt
returns the DNS TXT for
.IR host .
.B dnsptr
returns the DNS PTR for
.IR IP .
.B dnsmxip
returns the MTA IPs for
.IR domain .

.SH "SEE ALSO"
qmail-control(5),
qmail-smtpd(8)
