.TH s/qmail: s/qmail 7
.SH "NAME"
s/qmail \- overview of s/qmail documentation
.SH "INTRODUCTION"
.B s/qmail
is a secure, encrypting, authenticating, reliable, efficient, 
yet simple IPv4/IPv6 message transfer agent based on 
.B qmail 
and ought to be plug-in compatible.
The 
.B s/qmail 
software includes Dan Bernstein's
.B fastforward
and 
.B qmailanalog 
package in addition with other enhancements taken mainly from the
.B Spamcontrol
patch.


Users who want to control incoming messages
should read
.BR dot-qmail (5).
Available commands for the
.B .qmail
file include
.BR qbiff (1),
.BR qreceipt (1),
.BR forward (1),
.BR fastforward (1),
.BR bouncesaying (1),
and
.BR condredirect (1).
Other helpful commands include
.BR maildirmake (1),
.BR maildir2mbox (1),
and
.BR maildirwatch (1).

System administrators who want to control the entire
.B s/qmail
system should start with
.BR qmail-control (5),
.BR qmail-mfrules (8), 
and
.BR qmail-start (8).
There are three queue-monitoring tools:
.BR qmail-qread (8),
.BR qmail-qstat (8),
and
.BR qmail-tcpto (8).
.BR qmail-mrtg (8) 
allows to feed the
.B s/qmail
logs to
.BR MRTG .
Incoming SMTP connections are handled by
.BR qmail-smtpd (8)  
and
.BR qmail-recipients (8) 
optionally together with
.BR qmail-smtpam (8)
and
.BR qmail-authuser (8). 

.B s/qmail
offers two command-line message-sending interfaces:
.BR qmail-inject (8)
and
.BR mailsubj (1).
For background information on Internet mail messages,
see
.BR addresses (5),
.BR envelopes (5),
.BR qmail-header (5),
and
.BR forgeries (7).

Miscellaneous documentation includes
.BR qmail-limits (7)
and
.BR qmail-pop3d (8).

Apart from the Internet mail message transport protocols
.I ESMTP/ESMTPS
.B s/qmail 
supports
.I QMTP/QMTPS
together with the Pop Office message protocols
.IR POP3/POP3S 
however depending on the 
.B ucspi-ssl
package for TLS support.

This documentation describes version
VERSION
of
.BR s/qmail .
See
.B http://fehcom.de/sqmail.html
for other
.BR s/qmail -related
software.
